## Introduction

> “An outlier is an observation which deviates so much from other observations as to arouse suspicions that it was generated by a different mechanism”
> -- Hawkins 1980.

Anomalies, often referred to as outliers, abnormalities, rare events, or
deviants, are data points or patterns in data that do not conform to a notion of
normal behavior. Anomaly detection, then, is the task of finding those patterns
in data that do not adhere to expected norms, given previous observations.
The capability to recognize or detect anomalous behavior can provide highly
useful insights across industries. Businesses flagging or enacting a planned
response when these unusual cases occur can save them time, costs, and
customers. Hence, anomaly detection has found diverse applications in a variety
of domains: including IT analytics, networks intrusion analytics, medical
diagnostics, financial fraud protection, manufacturing quality control,
marketing and social media analytics, and more.

### Applications of Anomaly Detection

![Anomaly detection is relevant to several usecases - Network intrusion detection, Medical diagnosis, Fraud detection and manufacturing defect detection.](figures/ill-18.png)

#### Network Intrusion Detection

With the growth of computer networks and application usage dependencies, network
security is critical to running a modern viable business. Yet all computer
systems suffer from security vulnerabilities which are both technically
difficult and economically punishing to resolve once exploited. Business IT
systems collect data about their own network traffic, user activity in the
system, types of connection requests, etc. While most activity will be benign
and routine, analysis of this data may provide insights into unusual (anomalous)
activity within the network after (and ideally before) a substantive attack. In
practice, the damage and cost incurred right after an intrusion event escalates
faster than most teams are able to respond. Thus, it becomes critical to have
special-purpose intrusion detection systems (IDSs) that surface anomalous
probing and potential threat events early and in a reliable manner.

#### Medical Diagnosis

In many medical diagnosis applications, a variety of data points (e.g., x-rays,
MRIs, ECG.) indicative of health status are collected as part of diagnostic
processes. Some of these data points are also collected by end-user medical
devices (e.g., glucose monitors, pacemakers, smart watches). Anomaly detection
approaches can be applied to highlight situations of abnormal readings which may
be indicative of health conditions or precursor signals of medical incidents.  

#### Fraud Detection

In 2018, fraud was globally estimated to cost > $5 Trillion USD (> £3.89
Trillion GBP). Within the financial service industry, it is critical for service
providers to correctly identify and react to fraudulent transactions. In the
most straightforward cases, a transaction may be identified as fraudulent
relative to the historical transactions by a given party or by comparison to all
other transactions occurring within the same time period for a peer group. Here,
fraud can be cast as a deviation from normal transaction data and addressed
using anomaly detection approaches. Even as financial fraud is further clustered
into card-based, check-based, unauthorized account access, or authorized
payment-based categories, the core concepts of baselining an individual’s
standard behavior and looking for signals of unusual activity applies. 

#### Manufacturing Defect Detection

Within the manufacturing industry, an automated approach to the task of
detecting defects in large-volume manufactured items is vital to quality
assurance. This task can be cast as anomaly detection where the goal is to
identify manufactured items that significantly or even slightly differ from
ideal (normal) items that have passed quality assurance tests. The amount of
acceptable deviation is determined by the company and customers, as well as
industry and regulatory standards. 

::: info

Use Case Example:

The ScoleMans have been making drywall panels and are the leading regional
supplier for construction companies. Occasionally, some of the wall panels they
produce have defects - cracks, chips at edges, paint/coating issues, etc. As
part of their QA process, they have both RGB and thermal images of each produced
panel which let their QA engineers flag defective units. They want to automate
this process - i.e., develop tools that automatically identify these defects.
ScoleMans can use a deep anomaly detection model for identifying these defects.
In particular, they can use an AutoEncoder or GAN-based model built with
convolutional neural network blocks (see <<Chapter 3: Technical>> for more
information) to create a model of normal data based on images of normal walls.
This model can then be used to tag new wall images as normal or abnormal, and
set thresholds for alerts.

:::

Similarly, the task of predictive maintenance can be cast as anomaly detection.
For example, anomaly detection approaches can be applied to data from machine
sensors (vibrations, temperature, drift, etc.) where abnormal sensor readings
can be indicative of impending failures.

Thus we see anomaly detection is a significant problem faced in several areas.
Detecting and correctly classifying something unseen as anomalous is a
challenging problem that has been tackled in many different manners over the
years. While there are many approaches, the traditional machine learning
approaches are sub-optimal when it comes to high dimensional data and sequence
datasets since it fails to capture the complex structure in the data.

This report, with its accompanying prototype, explores deep learning-based
approaches that first learn to model normal behavior and then exploit this
knowledge to identify anomalies. While they can yield remarkable results on
complex and high dimensional data, there are several factors that influence the
choice of approach when building an anomaly detection application. In this
report we survey the approaches, highlighting their pros and cons.

