## Introduction

> “An outlier is an observation which deviates so much from other observations as to arouse suspicions that it was generated by a different mechanism.”
> -- Hawkins, _Identification of Outliers_ (1980)

Anomalies, often referred to as outliers, abnormalities, rare events, or
deviants, are data points or patterns in data that do not conform to a notion of
normal behavior. Anomaly detection, then, is the task of finding those patterns
in data that do not adhere to expected norms, given previous observations.
The capability to recognize or detect anomalous behavior can provide highly
useful insights across industries. Flagging unusual cases or enacting a planned
response when they occur can save businesses time, costs, and
customers. Hence, anomaly detection has found diverse applications in a variety
of domains, including IT analytics, network intrusion analytics, medical
diagnostics, financial fraud protection, manufacturing quality control,
marketing and social media analytics, and more.

### Applications of Anomaly Detection
// RH: Add some text between the headings, e.g. "We'll begin by taking a closer look at some possible use cases, before diving into different approaches to anomaly detection in the next chapter."?

#### Network Intrusion Detection

// RH: Opening simplified for clarity. 
Network security is critical to running a modern viable business, yet all computer
systems suffer from security vulnerabilities which are both technically
difficult and economically punishing to resolve once exploited. Business IT
systems collect data about their own network traffic, user activity in the
system, types of connection requests, and more. While most activity will be benign
and routine, analysis of this data may provide insights into unusual (anomalous)
activity within the network after&#151;and ideally before&#151;a substantive attack. In
practice, the damage incurred during an intrusion event often escalates faster
than most teams are able to mount an effective response. Thus, it becomes 
critical to have special-purpose intrusion detection systems (IDSs) in place that 
can surface potential threat events and anomalous probing early and in a reliable manner.

#### Medical Diagnosis

In many medical diagnosis applications, a variety of data points (e.g., X-rays,
MRIs, ECGs) indicative of health status are collected as part of diagnostic
processes. Some of these data points are also collected by end-user medical
devices (glucose monitors, pacemakers, smart watches, etc.). Anomaly detection
approaches can be applied to highlight abnormal readings that may
be indicative of health conditions or precursor signals of medical incidents.  

#### Fraud Detection

In 2018, fraud was estimated to have a [global financial cost](http://www.crowe.ie/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/The-Financial-Cost-of-Fraud-2019.pdf) of over £3.89 trillion ($5
trillion). Within the financial services industry, it is critical for service
providers to quickly and correctly identify and react to fraudulent transactions. In the
most straightforward cases, a transaction may be identified as fraudulent
by comparison to the historical transactions by a given party or to all
other transactions occurring within the same time period for a peer group. Here,
fraud can be cast as a deviation from normal transaction data and addressed
using anomaly detection approaches. Even as financial fraud is further clustered
into card-based, check-based, unauthorized account access, or authorized
payment-based categories, the core concepts of baselining an individual’s
standard behavior and looking for signals of unusual activity apply. 

#### Manufacturing Defect Detection

Within the manufacturing industry, an automated approach to the task of
detecting defects, particularly in items manufactured in large volumes, is vital to quality
assurance (QA). This task can be cast as an anomaly detection exercise, where the goal is to
identify manufactured items that significantly or even slightly differ from
ideal (normal) items that have passed QA tests. The amount of
acceptable deviation is determined by the company and customers, as well as
industry and regulatory standards. 

::: info

Use Case Example

ScoleMans have been making drywall panels for years and are the leading regional
supplier for construction companies. Occasionally, some of the wall panels they
produce have defects: cracks, chips at the edges, paint/coating issues, etc. As
part of their QA process they capture both RGB and thermal images of each produced
panel, which their QA engineers use to flag defective units. They want to automate
this process&#151;i.e., develop tools that automatically identify these defects.
This is possible using a deep anomaly detection model.
In particular, ScoleMans can use an autoencoder or GAN-based model built with
convolutional neural network blocks (see [Chapter 3](#deep-learning-for-anomaly-detection) for more
information) to create a model of normal data based on images of normal panels.
This model can then be used to tag new images as normal or abnormal, and
set thresholds for alerts.

:::

Similarly, the task of predictive maintenance can be cast as an anomaly detection problem.
For example, anomaly detection approaches can be applied to data from machine
sensors (vibrations, temperature, drift, etc.), where abnormal sensor readings
can be indicative of impending failures.

As these examples suggest, anomaly detection is critical in a variety of areas.
// RH: Or "is useful"?
Detecting and correctly classifying as anomalous something previously unseen is a
challenging problem that has been tackled in many different manners over the
years. While there are many approaches, as we'll see in the next chapters, 
the traditional machine learning (ML) techniques
are suboptimal when it comes to high-dimensional data and sequence
datasets because they fail to capture the complex structures in the data.

This report, with its accompanying prototype, explores deep learning-based
approaches that first learn to model normal behavior and then exploit this
knowledge to identify anomalies. While they're capable of yielding remarkable results on
complex and high-dimensional data, there are several factors that influence the
choice of approach when building an anomaly detection application. In this
report we survey the options, highlighting their pros and cons.

